[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
ERIK DEMAINE: All right,
let's get started.
Welcome back to 6.1200.
Today we're going to talk
about state machines, which
is a very cool tool for thinking
about processes over time.
And because this is math for
computer science, in particular
we're thinking about
analyzing algorithms
that do a bunch of steps.
And the state of the
machine changes over time,
like the state of
your memory changes.
And state machines
are a nice way
to reason about
how it's changing.
In particular, we'll talk about
an idea called invariance,
which you use to prove
algorithms and programs correct,
or you will in the future.
And so today we're
going to formalize that
into a kind of
induction, actually.
You haven't seen the
end of induction yet.
So let me tell you a little bit
about what state machines are.
And then we'll prove some
things and apply them
to analyzing puzzles
and other fun stuff.
So a state machine is going
to consist of two things--
three things-- a set of states.
And the idea-- this is
just an arbitrary set.
But the idea is that the
state of your machine
represents everything
that could possibly
be in the machine, all
the information that's
inside the machine.
We're going to start in some
state, which we call q0.
That's going to be
an element of Q.
And then we are allowed
some transitions.
And we're going to
write a transition
as q arrow r for some q
and r that are states.
OK, let me draw you an example,
very simple example of a state
machine so we have some idea
of what we're talking about.
This is going to be
an infinite counter.
I'm going to draw
it visually first.
And then we can say what it
means with all these sets.
Just dot, dot, dot.
Maybe I'll do one more.
OK, so this is a machine.
You can think of it as a single
register on your machine,
single variable.
It starts at 0.
This little notation
here means start state.
There's an arrow
coming from nowhere.
So that's where you start.
You start in state called 0.
So the set of states here
is 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on,
in other words, the
natural numbers.
And then when you're in state 0,
the only transition you can do,
the only arrow that goes out
from there is from 0 to 1.
And once you're in state 1,
the only thing you can do
is go from 1 to 2.
At some point, you
decide to increment.
Then you go from 2 to 3.
At some point you
decide to increment,
and you go from 3
to 4, and so on.
So this is a very
simple state machine.
It turns out it will be
interesting for certain reasons.
But in general,
you could imagine
having all sorts of arrows.
Maybe one has a transition
to 3, for example.
Or maybe 3 has a
transition to 1.
All of these are possible.
You can have one state that
has many transitions out of it.
You can go in loops.
You can do all sorts
of crazy things.
But let me finish precisely
specifying the counter.
So we said here q0
equals the state 0.
And what are the transitions?
Transitions are
all of the i to i
plus 1 transitions where
i is a natural number.
You may recall this set-builder
notation from lecture 1,
I think, where we write
an element on the left,
and we write some
condition on the right.
And so the idea is
T is the set of all
of these transitions i
to i plus 1 for every i
that's a natural number.
So that's an example.
But in general, we can have
all sorts of transitions
from any state to any state.
But you're only allowed to make
the transitions that are in T.
So let's formalize that
with the idea of execution.
It's going to be a
sequence of states
that you can reach by a
sequence of transitions.
So let's write it as q0, arrow,
q1, arrow, q2, and so on.
Maybe up to qn.
And importantly, every
transition we make for all i,
the qi to qi plus 1, should be
in T, not just any set of states
here.
We want to start in
q0, our start state.
We want to then make a valid
transition from q0 to q1, then
a valid transition from
q1 to q2, and so on.
So in this example, the
executions are very simple.
In the regular counter
without the red lines,
the executions are
just 0, 1, 2, 3.
That's one execution.
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, that's
another execution.
There's an infinite execution,
which is 0 all the way out
to infinity.
That's why I put
this in parentheses.
Either it stops at some qn, or
it just-- or the dot, dot, dot
continues off to infinity.
So we're trying to
simultaneously define
finite executions,
where you stop at qn,
and infinite executions,
where you go forever.
When you write an algorithm
or a piece of code,
you usually don't want
your program to go forever.
And so distinguishing between
infinite and finite executions
is one of the goals
of this lecture.
That will come at the end.
The other goal is to
show that your program is
correct in a certain sense,
that in any execution,
it does the things
that you want it to do.
So that's what we're going
to formalize in a moment.
But let me first talk
about reachable states,
the idea of reachability.
I'm going to call
a state r reachable
if there is an execution that
starts at the start state q0
and ends at r.
So in the counter example,
every state can be reached.
If I pick a state i, I can
go 0, 1, 2, 3, up to i.
But if I drew some other
circle over here, like "bad,"
with no arrows coming into
it, you can't reach "bad."
So usually we're only interested
in the reachable states
because you can't
get anywhere else.
I feel like I should
make a Reacher joke,
but I can't think of one.
I think, at this point, I want
to talk about a more interesting
example.
And then we will come
back to the theory.
So the interesting
example is this.
It's called the 8 puzzle.
You have a 3-by-3 grid with one
hole and 1-by-1 pieces in it.
And you can slide them around.
And so this is the solved state.
Your goal is to get here.
But you start in
some random state.
And you want to move the
pieces around to get there.
So what we'd like to do is
capture how to solve this puzzle
or actually, maybe
more interestingly,
is when it's solvable.
So here, for example, I'm almost
solved 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 5, 7, 8.
I wanted to get it to
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
It turns out that
puzzle is not solvable.
I claim it's impossible to
get from here to the goal.
So let's talk
about the 8 puzzle.
So I have some examples here.
1, 3, 4, 2, 5, 7, 8, 6.
Going to 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Or this one-- 1, 2,
3, 4, 6, 5, 7, 8.
Hopefully the rules are clear.
We'll formalize
them in a second.
I claim it is possible to
go from this arrangement
to this arrangement.
It's actually quite easy.
You move the 3 over.
You move the 2 up.
You move the 5 over.
You move the 6 up.
So this is possible.
I claim this one is impossible.
And one of the goals-- our first
goal really is to prove that,
that you cannot swap the
5 and the 6 by themselves.
We're going to build
up tools to do that.
So the counter was a very
simple state machine.
Let me now define a
more interesting state
machine, which is the 8 puzzle.
Remember, the set of
states q is supposed
to encapsulate everything
about the puzzle or your system
or whatever.
So this is going to be all
the different arrangements
of the eight pieces, plus
a blank, in a 3-by-3 grid.
So I'm just going to
write that in words.
All possible
arrangements of eight--
I'm going to call them of 1,
2, 3, up to 8, and the blank,
in a 3-by-3.
In later parts of
the class, we'll
be able to count how many
of these things there are.
It's nine factorial.
But we don't really care how
many there are right now.
We just want to think
about this as a set of all
the possible states
of this board.
Our start state, well, that's
either this one or this one,
depending on where
we want to start.
We're also going to define
a final state, q sub f.
And that is sorted
by reading order.
So this is q sub f.
Reading order-- like in English.
You read the top row,
second row, third row,
with the x at the end.
That's always our
goal in this puzzle.
That's our definition.
And then, what about
the transitions?
Transitions are going
to look like some q
to r for two states q and r.
And it's when you can get from
q to r by making one slide.
I'm just going to
write that in words--
can get from state
q, that 3-by-3 grid,
to state r in one
slide, meaning--
meaning you exchange
the blank, the x,
with one of its
neighboring cells.
So in particular, there is at
most four different transitions
from any state.
You could move the thing above
the blank into the blank.
You can move the left, right, or
below the blank into the blank.
But if it's on the boundary,
you have fewer than four moves.
So hopefully now I've
said it enough times
the rules are clear if you
haven't played this game before.
15 puzzle is much more common,
but 8 puzzle is a little easier
to think about--
smaller pictures,
easier to draw,
and I can actually solve it in
a reasonable amount of time.
OK, so this is a claim
that we want to prove.
You cannot get from this
state, with 5 and 6 flipped,
into this state.
And so now we're going to build
some technology to do that.
And that technology is a--
first part of it is
called a state predicate.
So we've seen predicates before.
Predicate is just a--
a proposition that
depends on some variable.
And here, the
variable is a state.
So P of q is either
true or false
depending on which state
you are looking at.
You can also think of this,
if you're comfortable with
functions-- we'll talk
more about functions later
in the class--
this is a function from q to
the Booleans true or false.
It's an equivalent way to
think about it, whatever
you're more comfortable with.
For every state, this predicate
assigns true or false.
Now we're going to define
two types of predicates that
are particularly interesting.
A predicate is
preserved if whenever
there's a transition from q
to r, P of q implies P of r.
What does that mean?
It means that if I start in
some state where P is true
and I do a transition,
then P remains true.
So the truth of p is
preserved along transitions.
We'll make this
concrete in a second.
Second important notion
is called an invariant,
or invariant state
predicate, if P of q
is true for all
reachable states q.
Crucially, in this
definition, we're
only interested in
the reachable states.
That's kind of important
for the 8 puzzle
because we claim some
states are unreachable.
Like, if I start here, the claim
is that this one is unreachable.
That's what we'd like
to prove actually.
So this seems useful.
In particular-- let's
write this fun fact--
if P of q is
invariant, meaning it's
true in all reachable states,
and P of q is false for,
maybe I'll write P of r
here, then r is unreachable.
That's pretty much by definition
and maybe the contrapositive.
This is saying invariant means
that for all reachable states,
P of q must be true.
So if I can find a particular
state r where P is false,
that means you cannot reach it.
And that's what
we'd like to show.
We'd like to show this state
is unreachable from this one.
So maybe we can use these
state predicates to do that,
and indeed we can.
Let me tell you another tool.
How do we prove that a state
predicate is invariant?
This seems a little bit
tricky because this is talking
about all reachable states.
Reachable states is huge.
I don't know.
Preserved seems
relatively easy to prove.
This is just saying,
for each transition,
something implies something.
So I'd like to
prove preservedness.
And I'd like to use
that to get invariant.
And we're going to do
that using induction,
but a particular
form of induction
called the invariant principle.
So this is for a state predicate
P of q, if P of q0 is true
and P of q is invariant--
get it right; preserved--
then P of q is invariant.
This is what I said I wanted.
On the one hand, invariance
seemed hard to argue.
Preserved seemed easy to argue.
And this is the theorem that
connects them in the way
that we want.
It says, if you
can prove preserved
and you can prove that P is
true in the very initial state,
then it must be invariant.
I think this is
intuitive, right?
If you start true
and preserve says,
every time you do a
transition, you stay true,
then you're always going to be
true in any reachable state,
anywhere you can get.
In fact, this is
induction in another form.
So if you recall
in the past, which
I happen to have right
here, induction, we have--
regular induction
says for predicate P
of n over natural numbers
instead of states, if P of 0
is true, and for every
natural number P of n
implies P of n plus
1 is true, then
for every natural
number P of n is true.
This is saying the same thing.
Actually, it's
exactly the same thing
if you apply this invariant
principle to this counter.
In the counter, the states
are the natural numbers.
And the transitions are exactly
going from i to i plus 1.
So the invariant principle
is actually a generalization
of the induction axiom.
The special case
here, where we plug
in the counter as
the state machine,
this is true for
all state machines.
And if we plug in the counter
for our state machine,
we get exactly the
induction axiom.
This is our base
case in some sense.
We prove that P is true
in the initial state.
This is our induction step.
It says that if we start
at q and we transition
to some other r that's
reachable via transition,
and in the particular
case of a counter that
is going from q to q plus
1, then we get that P of q
is true for all
reachable states.
And in the counter,
everything is reachable.
So invariant principle
implies induction axiom.
Conversely, we can prove
the invariant principle
using induction.
Maybe it's useful
to see that proof.
So let's prove the invariant
principle by induction.
So it's not so
obvious how exactly.
But the idea is to specify
a particular induction
hypothesis, which is, for all
length n executions, P of qn
is true.
There should be
a colon out here.
I think it's intuitive
that this is enough.
But we'll justify
why this is enough.
The idea is if you have
some state that's reachable,
it's reachable by some finite
execution of some length.
And we're going
to prove for all n
that all length n
executions P of qn is true.
And by inducting over
length, we essentially
start with short executions and
then make them gradually longer.
And that makes
this easy to prove.
So let's do a base
case, IH of 0.
Well, that's all
length 0 executions.
There's only one
length 0 execution.
That is just q0.
You start at q0,
and you stay there.
That's length 0.
And we claim that P of q0-- q0
is clearly a reachable state.
You get there via
length 0 execution.
Why is it true?
This.
It's what we assumed.
OK, so by 1.
So that's the base case.
Of course, the more interesting
one is the induction step.
I'm going to assume--
we get to choose.
We could follow this
plan, assume P of n
And prove P of n plus 1.
I find it slightly more
intuitive to assume P of n--
or sorry, instead of P, it's IH
here for induction hypothesis--
IH of n minus 1.
And we're going
to prove IH of n.
What does it mean
to prove IH of n?
It says, well, for all length
n executions, P of qn is true.
So how do we prove it for all?
We just take an arbitrary
thing in the quantifier.
So take any-- consider
any length and execution.
And then we need to prove
the property we want,
which is P of qn.
So let me give some
notation for that execution.
Any length n execution
q0, q1, qn minus 1, qn.
And what we want to
show is that P of qn.
That's our goal right.
It says, for all length n
executions, P of qn is true.
So we take an
arbitrary execution.
If we can prove P of qn
is true, then we're done.
Well, somehow we want
to use induction here.
We've assumed the induction
hypothesis for size n minus 1.
Can you see a length
n-minus-1 execution here
that might be interesting?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: q1 to qn.
ERIK DEMAINE: q1 to qn.
That's a good idea.
Does that work?
Is that an execution?
Let's go back and check.
Execution of a state
machine is an infinite
or a finite sequence starting
with q0 and maybe ending.
But it needs to start with q0.
So there's two
natural choices here.
One would be starting
at q1 and going to qn.
But q1 might not equal q0.
So that might not be
a valid execution.
So we wouldn't be able to
apply induction to that.
The other obvious choice
is q0 to qn minus 1.
That is a valid
execution of length 1
smaller, length n minus 1,
because it starts with q0.
A lot of terms here.
So it's easy to lose track.
But eventually, they
will become comfortable.
So by induction
hypothesis of n minus 1,
if we apply it to this
execution of length n minus 1,
we learn that P of
q n minus 1 is true.
That's what the induction
hypothesis says.
The last state in your
execution is true.
So now we know P
of this is true.
We just need to prove
P of this is true.
Why is that?
Because property 2--
P of q is preserved, which
we can unroll over here.
Says, for every transition,
in particular the one
from qn minus 1 to qn, P of
q minus 1 implies P of qn.
So by 2, P of q n
minus 1 implies P of qn
because this is a
transition in T. So P of qn.
So that's the end of
the induction step.
So by induction, we get, for all
n, induction hypothesis of n.
And the idea is
that this implies
P of q for all
reachable states q
because if you have
a reachable state q,
there's, by definition, a
reachable way over on the left.
There's some execution that gets
there, and it has some length.
And so IH of that length
gives you what you want.
So that's how we prove
the invariant principle.
It's a pretty intuitive notion.
But may be nice to see yet
another example of an induction
proof.
Great.
So how do we use this?
Let's go over here.
Here is a template for
proving a theorem, which
is P of q is invariant.
This is the thing I keep
saying is hard to prove.
Or by the definition,
it seems hard to prove.
But using this
invariant principle,
it's going to be easy.
Here's what a general
proof will look like.
We can say, proof by
invariant principle.
For the invariant
principle to apply,
we need to prove two things--
number 1 and number 2.
So number one is prove
that P of q0 is true.
And in a template, we just say
because reasons which we don't
know, or we have to fill in.
And the second thing is
that P of q is preserved.
That's the more
interesting thing.
And for this, we need to unroll
the definition of "preserved."
Says for all q, all transitions
q to r, P of q implies q of r.
So how do we prove that?
We just take any
transition in t, q to r.
And because it's an implication,
we can assume the left-hand--
if we want to prove
an implication,
we can assume the left part--
this is the direct proof--
and prove the right part.
So we can assume P of q is true.
And then what we need to do
is show that P of r is true.
That's the interesting step,
which we need to fill in.
But this is the template
we're going to now use
to analyze the 8 puzzle.
Of course, I haven't defined
what predicate we're analyzing.
That's the next step.
But once we have
a predicate, we'll
be able to prove
that it's invariant
using this simple structure.
Just check it.
Check that it's initially true.
And check that if you start
from something that's true
and you take a transition
out of it, it's still true.
Great.
So let me define a
predicate for the 8 puzzle.
Maybe I want it closer to
these examples, actually.
Yeah, let's go here.
I think you know the
definition of a state machine.
OK, so for this
8-puzzle state machine,
I'd like to define a bit
of a bizarre predicate.
So first, I'm going to define
the notion of an inverted pair.
This is going to depend
on what state we're in.
So let's look at inverted
pairs in this example
and use three examples.
So an inverted pair
is two numbers, so not
the blank but two
numbers between 1 and 8.
And I want i less than j.
And yet I want j to appear
before i in the reading order.
So for example-- my red chalk--
in this picture, this
state, 2 and 4 are inverted.
In reading order, 4 comes before
2, yet 4 is greater than 2.
Any others?
8 and 6 are inverted.
6 and 7 are inverted.
7 is bigger than 6.
8 is bigger than 6.
But they come earlier than
6 in the reading order.
I think there's one more.
3 and--
AUDIENCE: 2.
ERIK DEMAINE: 2.
Thank you.
That's one's a little trickier
because it's on different rows.
But in reading order,
3 comes before 2,
and yet 3 is greater than 2.
So there are four inverted
pairs in this example.
How many inverted pairs
are there in this example?
Zero.
Zero inverted pairs.
How about this one?
One, yeah.
I thought you were
holding up your hand.
But you're holding
up one finger.
[CHUCKLES]
6 comes after 5.
That was the only
thing out of order.
That's what we started out with.
Where do you come
up with this idea?
It just is fundamental.
You're supposed to
magically invent it.
But if you fool around
with the puzzle enough,
it's actually somewhat
intuitive in that you
can get where it's
almost sorted,
but there's just one
pair that's wrong.
So you might think,
well, maybe there's
something about
these inverted pairs.
Let's talk about
them in general,
not just about 0-versus-1
inverted pairs.
But let's count them.
So over here, we had
one inverted pair.
Here we had zero inverted pairs.
Here we had four inverted pairs.
And I claim it was possible
to go from four inverted pairs
to zero but impossible to go
from one inverted pair to zero.
Why?
Parity, it turns out.
"Parity" means odd or even.
So P of q is going
to be that the number
of inverted pairs in state
q is odd, turns out to be.
This proof will
work for either one.
But if we want to prove this
particular impossibility result,
odd is what we need.
So p of q is going to be
true for this configuration
because it has an odd
number of inverted pairs.
And it's going to be
false for these two.
Why is that interesting?
Because over here, we said,
suppose we can show that P of q
is invariant.
I claim that's true.
If we start from
here, where P of q
starts true, because the number
of inverted pairs starts odd,
and we find another state
where P of r is false,
because here the number
of inverted pairs
is even instead of odd,
then r is unreachable.
That means it's impossible
to get from this state
to this state.
That's what we want to prove.
So if we can prove this
invariant property,
we can plug it into here and get
the puzzle impossibility result
that we want.
That's where everything's
going to come together.
So let's prove that P of q is--
ideally, we'd like
it to be invariant.
But to prove
invariant, we're going
to start with proving
that it's preserved.
The reason for the
8 puzzle, that I
want to talk about preserved
first, is to be invariant,
it depends where you start.
And that's a little arbitrary.
There isn't one natural
start state for the 8 puzzle.
You might start here.
That'd be a very easy puzzle.
But preserved is just a general
property about the system.
So I don't need to
assume anything for that.
So we want to do this part.
We want to prove P
of q is preserved.
So we consider any transition
q to r where P of q is true.
We need to prove P of r is true.
So here, let me plug in the
outline of step 2 there.
Consider any transition
q to r that's valid,
it's in T, where P of q is true.
And we want to show
P of r is true.
What do transitions
look like in this game?
Well, relative to reading order,
reading order talks about rows.
So there's really two types
of moves we care about.
There's horizontal
moves left and right.
And there's vertical
moves up and down.
I claim those are
the two cases that we
need to think
about because we're
thinking about reading order.
So case 1 is that this
transition, q to r,
is a horizontal move.
Horizontal move.
So this is like we take some
number i, and next to it
there's an x.
And maybe if we move to the
right, that would be x i.
Or if we move to the left,
it would be like that.
It's one of those
two transitions.
x here means the blank.
How does that change
reading order?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Nothing.
ERIK DEMAINE: Nothing.
Nothing changes.
The reading order is the same.
When we're talking
about reading order,
we're only talking
about the numbers.
We don't care about the x.
So no changes in reading
order or in the number
of inverted pairs because that's
only dependent on reading order.
So we have P of r.
Case 1 is easy.
Let's prove case
2 maybe over here.
Case 2 is a vertical move here.
There's actually
something to show--
more interesting,
but not much harder.
OK, I'm going to draw some
pictures for intuition.
It could be we
are moving i down,
and there's two things
to the right of i.
It could be we're moving
i in the middle, to here.
Or it could be we're moving
i on the right, down to here.
And this is for a down move.
Up is going to be symmetric.
But let's first think
about down moves.
So in order to do a down
move, in reading order,
there are two items
that come after i.
Because we're moving down,
there is something after i.
There's a whole row
after i until this x.
So if we can move i down,
there's two numbers between i
and the x in reading order.
And i starts before those
numbers if we're going down
and ends after.
So the move here, we can
think of it as swapping--
we want to swap i with x.
But this is equivalent to
swapping i with j, first of all,
and then swapping i with k.
Instead of going straight down--
and another color--
I'm going to think of swapping
i to first come after j
and then come after k.
That's the same as the x.
And it doesn't matter
where we started.
It could be here,
and then we go here.
Or it could be here, we go
after j, and then we go after k.
The point is if we swap--
if we figure out how to swap
two adjacent numbers in reading
order and we swap i twice,
then i gets to where the x is
because this is a 3-by-3.
That's why twice.
So now what we care about is
what happens when we swap two
adjacent items in reading order,
so not adjacent in the 3-by-3
grid but adjacent
in reading order.
That's what we care about.
If we can solve this
and we do it twice,
then we will know what happens
when we do a vertical move.
So what happens when I
swap two numbers i and j?
How does that change
the reading order?
I mean, it swaps i and j.
That's all.
Everything before i
is still before i.
Everything after j
is still after j.
The only thing is
we're changing--
if they're adjacent
items i and j,
we're only flipping
whether ij is inverted.
If ij was in the correct order
before, if i was less than j,
then, after I do the swap,
they're an inverted pair.
If they were an
inverted pair initially,
if i is bigger than j,
after I do the swap,
they're no longer
an inverted pair.
So swapping two
adjacent items changes
the number of inverted
pairs by plus or minus 1.
If they were inverted before,
it decreases the number.
If they weren't inverted
before, it increases the number,
but always by one.
Never stays the same.
Never changes by seven.
So when we swap
two adjacent pairs,
we change by plus or minus 1.
When we do a
vertical move, we do
we want to do two of
these adjacent swaps.
So let's continue over here.
So if we do two
adjacent swaps, this
will change the number of
inverted pairs by plus or minus
1, plus plus or minus 1.
Were each of these
pluses or minuses?
We don't know.
They could be plus or minus.
But the point is plus or
minus 1 is an odd number.
Plus or minus 1
is an odd number.
When I add two odd numbers,
this is an even number.
Turns out you can
draw a little picture.
If we start at 0 here and we
do plus or minus 1, and then
from here we do plus or
minus 1, and from here we
do plus or minus
1-- this is a case
analysis of all the things
you could do-- you either get
2 or 0 or minus 2.
These three numbers
are all even.
But I don't particularly care.
It happens to be just
these three values.
What I care is that
this number is even.
We started with P of q
being true over here.
Assume that P of q is true.
That means that the number
of inverted pairs in state q
is odd.
And now we change that
number by an even amount.
Therefore, it will be odd still.
If we take an odd number, we add
an even number, it stays odd.
Therefore, P of r is true.
Question?
AUDIENCE: What
happens if you swap--
if you swapped the i and the j?
ERIK DEMAINE: So the question
is, why is this two swaps?
So the funny thing here--
so it's right.
If I swap i and j, then--
let me maybe draw a
picture somewhere here.
Let's just go here.
Scratch space.
So if we have i, j, k,
x, and I swap i and j,
then I get j, i, k, x.
And then I swap i and k.
Then I get j, k, i, x.
And you're right, i is
not quite where I want it.
[CHUCKLES] This is funny.
I really want i
to be here, which
I can do like this because that
doesn't change reading order.
OK, it's good that
we spelled this out.
And also, I can do
horizontal moves for free.
So j, k, i.
This is maybe a way
to think about it.
The point is that these three
have the same reading order.
So those don't really count.
But I'm glad you
had me spell it out.
AUDIENCE: So the [INAUDIBLE]
we're doing right now
are not part of the
valid transition.
It's just to just separate them?
ERIK DEMAINE: Right.
These are not valid
transitions, indeed.
At the end, we get to something
that's a valid transition.
So the transition goes
from here directly to here.
And we're splitting
it up into some sub
moves that aren't valid
moves by themselves
but easier to analyze.
First, we think about what
happens when we swap i and j.
That changes by plus or minus 1.
Then we swap i and k.
That changes these
by a plus or minus 1.
Then we do these
horizontal moves,
which doesn't change
anything, or horizontal moves.
Moving the x in reading order
doesn't change anything.
Cool?
All right, great.
I feel like I skipped a
little bit of a step here.
So the point is, when we swap--
in case 2, when we
do a vertical move,
we started with an odd
number of inverted pairs.
And then we add an even number.
And odd plus even equals odd.
Therefore, P of r is true.
That's the point.
So if we start odd,
we will stay odd.
If you swap odd and
even in this proof,
you can also show that if you
start even, you stay even.
But what we really want
is, for this part here,
we want to get P of q to be
invariant and find a place where
P is false, and then conclude
that r is unreachable.
So let's do that quickly.
So let's define
this state to be q0.
So for this q0, we have--
or maybe let's say if P of q0
is true, as in this example
because there's an odd number
of inverted pairs, then P of q
is invariant.
And so by this property,
if P of r is false,
then r is unreachable.
So actually what I
care about is not
p of r but P of the
final state, qf.
So that's exactly the scenario.
We start in a
state where we have
an odd number of transitions.
We're trying to get to a state
with zero inverted pairs.
And so that's not
going to be possible
because we start with P true.
And we somehow are trying to
reach a state where P is false.
But if we can prove this
invariant property--
and we've basically done
all the hard work here.
This is just by the
invariant principle.
So now I'm following the
outline over on the left.
Step 1 is-- or part 1
is that P of q0 is true.
We assume that.
Step 2 is that P
of q is preserved.
And we just proved that.
This is our theorem.
So maybe you don't know
this word, "corollary"--
or "cor-aw-luh-ree"
if you're Canadian.
"Corollary" means
something that follows.
So "theorem" means
something that's true.
Both of these are
supposed to be true.
But these are words to say that
a theorem was the main thing we
wanted to prove.
And then corollary
is something that
follows immediately from it.
It's almost a
one-line proof here.
Once we have the theorem,
the corollary is immediate.
It's just some terminology.
So hopefully you now
believe this is impossible.
Any questions
about the 8 puzzle?
For fun, let's solve
it one more time.
I actually didn't have time this
morning to implement the "only
generate solvable puzzles."
So I have no idea whether
this will be solvable.
It's kind of exciting.
If you can count the inversions,
you'll figure it out.
But I keep moving it,
so it's pretty hard.
And I'm following a
particularly slow algorithm
for solving this puzzle,
which I won't describe.
But it's on wikiHow
if you're interested.
Oh, I solved it.
Great.
So I must have started with an
even number of inverted pairs.
In a future version, I
will add that number.
But there we go.
Cool.
Question?
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
final stage [INAUDIBLE]?
ERIK DEMAINE: So your question
is, if, in this state,
we move six down, how many
inverted pairs do we get?
Let's draw it.
So that is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, x.
It should be 2.
7, 8, 6.
How many inverted
pairs are there?
7 is inverted with 6.
8 is inverted with 6.
And that's it.
So there's an example in action.
Vertical move, changing by 2.
Sometimes it changes by 0.
If i is sandwiched in
between j and k numerically,
sometimes it changes
by plus or minus 2.
Of course, if we do the
up move, we subtract 2.
There was another question.
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Can you
explain the definition
of preservation and invariance?
And [INAUDIBLE]?
ERIK DEMAINE: OK, question is
explain preserved and invariant.
And where are we using
the different parts?
If I can make an induction
analogy for a second,
preserved means--
is like your induction step.
It says, every time you do a
transition, if P started true,
it remains true.
And invariant is what you
get out of the induction.
Let's go over to the
invariant principle here.
The invariant
principle basically
says preserved
implies invariant,
except you also need to
check that you start true.
If P starts true and
whenever you do a transition
it remains true,
then it's always
true for every reachable state.
OK, so crucially in
this setup, we're
ignoring all the
unreachable states,
just talking-- invariant only
talks about reachable states.
It says that every
reachable state P is true.
That's what we're
concluding from,
we start true, and every
time we start in a true state
and we make a transition,
we remain true.
Hopefully that's clear.
Takes a little while
to get comfortable
with these definitions,
but very important,
the difference between
preserved and invariant.
So if you forget, read
the definition, or just
follow this template.
This makes it pretty clear.
Usually, we just want
to prove invariant.
And there's a clear start state.
So in fact, the next
example will have a--
well, no, that's not true.
But if there's a
clear start state,
you can just follow
this template.
And all you care about
is proving invariant.
OK, let's do the next
topic, which is termination.
And maybe I want to start
with an example, which
is a simple sort of machine.
This is another state machine.
And it sorts n numbers.
This is a problem
you study a lot
in the follow-ons to this
class, the algorithms classes.
So suppose we're given a bunch
of real numbers, or integers,
whatever.
We want to sort them
in increasing order.
OK, here is-- so they're given
in some particular order, a1
through an.
And I want to rearrange
them so it has exactly
the same set of numbers--
or exactly the same numbers
but in a different order,
and this time increasing order.
So I want a1 to be less
than or equal to a2,
less than or equal
to a3, and so on.
Here is a very simple
algorithm to do
that, which is while
there's some index
i, where ai is bigger than ai
plus 1, swap ai with ai plus 1.
So I'm just looking
at consecutive pairs
ai to ai plus 1.
And if there's some that's
out of order, i is less than i
plus 1 but ai is
greater than ai plus 1,
then I want to swap
them in the right order.
We can see this algorithm
in action for fun.
And then we're going to convert
this algorithm into a state
machine.
So just pretend you understand
algorithms for a second.
Here, we have the numbers
in a particular order.
The height corresponds to
the value that's written,
3, 6, 2, 5, 4, 1.
And we're just going
to do an example.
But then we do a swap.
A swap-- we're always
swapping adjacent pairs.
And then Pac-Man comes
over to the left,
and we get them in sorted order.
So that is the algorithm.
Let's now analyze it
as a state machine.
So first question is,
what are the states Q?
Well, throughout
this algorithm-- so
this is in our head, what
we're thinking about doing.
And we choose Ii arbitrarily.
Now we're going to model
it as a state machine.
This will make precise
what's actually going on.
As we do this, we're taking the
original items in some order.
We're always swapping items.
So at any moment in time, what
we have is some reordering
of the ai's.
Those are our states.
Let's define Q to be
all possible orderings.
These may not all be reachable,
but this is the thing that's
easy to define--
all possible
orderings of a1 to an.
For this template--
OK, what are the transitions?
Transitions are going to
take some ai ai plus one pair
and swap them.
So if we start with
them in this order,
they're going to end up
in the opposite order.
And we are only
allowed to do this when
ai is bigger than ai plus 1.
So that's the transitions.
Implicitly, this specifies
exactly the algorithm.
The algorithm says, take
some i where ai is bigger
than ai plus 1, and swap them.
That's exactly what
the transitions
specify because we can
take any transition that's
valid from any state.
So if we can find any i where
ai is greater than ai plus 1,
then swapping that pair
is a valid transition.
We don't know which one will do.
State machine will
follow some execution
which will do one of these
until it can't anymore.
OK, great.
Can't anymore.
Let's define a tool
which is final states.
Let's call a state
q final if there's
no transition q to r and T,
if there's no transition that
starts at q and goes somewhere.
So in the 8 puzzle, there
are no final states.
You can always make moves.
You never are done.
You're done only when you
happen to reach the final state.
But there's nothing
in the move definition
that prevents you
from continuing.
In this problem, there
are final states.
I claim it's exactly a0 to
an, where a1 is less than
or equal to a2, is less than
or equal to a3, and so on,
is less than or equal to
an, namely the sorted order.
Why?
Well, first of all, I
claim this state is final
because if you look at any
pair ai, ai plus 1, we have ai
is less than or
equal to ai plus 1.
So we don't have a
transition out of there.
So these states are
definitely final.
I also claim that it's
all the final states
because if I had some state
where this is not true,
that means one of these
inequalities is not true.
So that means there's some ai
that's greater than ai plus 1.
And then there's a transition.
So that was a spoken argument
for why the final states are
exactly this.
Technically, we're proving
all of these states are final
and that all final
states are of this form,
and therefore these are
all the final states.
OK, cool.
So this gives us something
we call partially correct.
I'm not going to
define this formally.
Partially correct
machine is a machine
where, if it terminates,
which I haven't defined,
then gives the correct answer.
What does "terminate" mean?
OK, to terminate means--
when we're going to say a state
machine terminates, really what
we're meaning is it
always terminates.
No matter how you execute
this machine, it stops.
And the only way it can stop is
that it reaches a final state.
If you think about
it for a second,
the definition of "execution"
was a sequence of transitions.
And so terminates says
there's no infinite execution.
For an infinite execution,
that means every state qi,
there's some transition
out of it to qi plus 1.
So if that's not possible,
that means that, at some point,
you reach a state that's final.
And from there,
there's no transition.
So you could either
say "it terminates"
means there's no infinite
execution or every execution
reaches a final state.
These turn out to be equivalent.
So now I claim what we've shown
is that, for the simple sorter
machine, it actually sorts in
this partially correct sense
that if the machine
terminates, then
it will give the correct
answer because if it reaches
a final state, it's sorted.
That's what we just argued.
Now, that's not enough.
We also want to show
that it terminates.
And so really, the
main thing to do--
the main thing to do--
is to prove termination.
And in particular, let's
say a machine is correct
if it terminates and produces
the right answer, which
was partially correct.
OK, I haven't formally
defined "right answer."
But for the sorting
problem, it's clear.
We want to get them in order so
that this holds, a1 is less than
or equal to a2, is less than
or equal to dot, dot, dot.
OK, so we've proved
partially correct.
But we need to prove correct.
And in particular, we need
to show that it terminates.
So we need some tools
for proving termination
for this machine.
Let's go to another board.
We want to make sure that this
algorithm doesn't take forever,
it doesn't go in
an infinite loop
and never reaches
the sorted state.
Let me define a
general tool for this.
This is how we will always
prove termination in this class.
It's called a derived variable.
This is a reference to
random variables, which
we will see when we
get to the probability
section of the class.
Lots of forward
references today.
It's very simple.
It's just, for every state, we
define a real number, x of q,
however you want.
In other words,
this is a function
from the set of states
to the real numbers.
In our applications,
we're only going
to think of the
natural numbers here.
But in general, this
could be a real number.
And we're going to call it
a derived variable strictly
decreasing if whenever we have
a transition from q to r in T--
it's a valid transition--
we have x of q is strictly
greater than x of r.
The new value is strictly
less than the old value.
That's strictly decreasing.
This is a very
strange looking colon.
So again, this is
about a state machine.
So we can talk
about transitions.
And every transition strictly
decreases the derived variable.
This is going to be our
analog to state predicates
and preserved invariance.
State predicates we map to
true and false, or 0 and 1.
Now we're generalizing
to allow it to map
to any number, any real number.
But very similar notion.
Just we're outside
the Boolean realm now.
It's very odd to
talk about strictly
decreasing for Booleans.
We need this.
OK, here is a wonderful theorem.
It'll be obvious
once I state it.
But it's very useful
for proving termination.
It's how most
termination arguments go.
So it says, suppose you have
a derived variable x of q.
And suppose it satisfies
two properties.
Property 1 is it's actually over
the natural numbers, not reals.
And property 2 is that
it's strictly decreasing.
Then, state machine terminates.
So the "then" is, of
course, what we want.
We want to show that our
state machine terminates.
So I claim this is
all you need to show.
You need to construct some
derived variable where the value
is always a natural number.
So crucially, it's
always non-negative.
And it's always an integer.
I highlight this instead of
putting it in the definition
because this is something
we really need to prove.
This theorem is false if
you allow real numbers.
It's false if you
allow negative numbers.
Very important that they're
non-negative integers.
So that's something
we need to check.
And it's strictly decreasing.
That's all we need.
Then we're guaranteed the
machine will terminate.
Why?
Any guesses why?
Why is this guaranteed that
our machine terminates?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: Well,
when you reach 0,
if x sub q is
strictly decreasing,
there's nowhere to decrease.
So there must be no
more transitions.
ERIK DEMAINE: That sounds good.
So when x of q reaches 0--
I don't know if it does,
but if it reaches 0,
you definitely can't go
any farther because there's
no transitions out of 0.
You can't strictly decrease
from 0 if you're non-negative.
Why do we get to zero?
Yeah?
AUDIENCE: We don't necessarily.
But based on the construction
of natural numbers,
we will reach a minimum because
it's bounded below, [INAUDIBLE].
ERIK DEMAINE: OK, we
don't necessarily reach 0,
but we get to some minimum.
Yeah, I think these are
all in the right direction.
I'll write down
what I would call
a sketch that's thinking about
it kind of the other way around.
Instead of focusing
on x of q decreasing,
I want to think about
executions of this machine.
We want to prove that
the machine terminates.
That means that there are
no infinite sequences.
In other words, all
executions have finite length.
I claim all executions
have length at most x of q0
because every time I
take a step, every time I
do a transition, x
decreases by at least one.
If it starts at x
of q0, it can only
decrease by 1 that many times.
And at that point, it will
have to have reached 0,
and then it has to stop.
Maybe it stopped earlier.
But this guarantees
that it stops.
Every step I make, I strictly
decrease x of q by at least one.
We start here.
We can't go below 0.
So the number of
moves is at most that.
You can prove this by induction.
But it's kind of
straightforward.
So you're in the right idea.
But this is a
little more precise.
Great.
So now let's apply our
termination theorem
to the simple sorter machine.
But to do that,
we need to define
one of these derived variables.
And-- [CHUCKLES] --it's
actually this one.
I'll be mean and
just erase this.
There's our derived variable.
I'll rewrite it.
So there's a reason
these two examples
are in the same lecture.
They use the same idea,
which is inverted pairs.
Oh, perhaps I shouldn't
have erased the definition
of inverted pairs.
Sorry.
So back to the simple
sorting machine.
We're going to define
P of q to be the number
of inverted pairs in state q.
That's some number.
It's a natural number.
It's always greater
than or equal to 0.
It's always an integer
because inverted pairs
were this discrete object.
It was a set ij--
oh, maybe I need to
redefine this a little bit.
It's no longer reading order.
So what is an inverted pair?
This is ij, where
i is less than j--
sorry-- but ai is
greater than aj.
So i and j here are
indices into this sequence.
So in this example,
let's say 6, 2
is inverted because 6
is to the left of 2.
But 6 is greater than 2.
And that's the opposite
of what we want.
But also, 6, 1 is inverted.
It's not just adjacent
pairs-- all the pairs.
So there's a bunch
of pairs here.
How many?
It's exactly the number
of dots in this diagram.
Each dot-- which we
construct by taking
each of these numbers
of the particular height
and drawing a leftward
ray, a line to the left.
And every time we
hit another number,
that means that number
was taller than I was.
So 1, for example, is
wrong with everybody
because it's supposed to
be all the way on the left.
So with this funny
height diagram,
you just draw these lines.
Those are the inverted
pairs-- a nice visualization.
Thanks, Zach.
TA: And Brynmore.
ERIK DEMAINE: And Brynmore.
So now we think about what
happens when we do a swap.
So for example, here I
swap these two items.
Oh, great.
Before, 6 and 2 were
inverted; now they're not.
And that's all that changed
because in the algorithm,
in the transitions, we're
only swapping adjacent pairs.
If I swap it back,
the number increases.
And now if we watch
this algorithm,
each time it swaps
an adjacent pair,
it decreases by 1, the
number of inverted pairs.
Watch it one more time for fun.
I love this animation.
I claim this P of q is
strictly decreasing.
Why?
Because every time I
do a transition from q
to r, P of r is 1
smaller than P of q.
Let's look at the definition
of transition over here.
When I do a transition
in this algorithm,
I only swap two
adjacent elements.
So the inverted pairs with
everything else doesn't change.
And these guys were
guaranteed inverted.
I told you that ai was bigger
than ai plus 1 whenever
I did a transition.
So I decreased by 1 the
number of inverted pairs here.
So I strictly decrease by
exactly 1 every single time.
So in fact, the running
time of this algorithm,
the number of swaps
that we do is exactly
the number of inverted pairs.
But in particular, it
terminates in finite time.
That's what we get out of
this termination theorem
because we checked
this function.
This derived variable
is non-negative.
It's an integer.
And it's strictly decreasing.
Therefore, our sorting
algorithm actually terminates.
Yay.
I was supposed to do an
announcement about problem
sets--
TA: Yes.
ERIK DEMAINE: --which was--
the-- oh, yes.
We're about to release
solutions to a problem set--
problem set 1.
And you may recall you
can submit your problem
set 1 anytime between now
and the end of semester.
So what do you do?
Are you allowed to look
at those solutions?
Yes, you're allowed to
look at the solutions.
But you cannot copy
those solutions.
You can look at them,
then put them aside,
remember the solution,
think about the solution,
write it in your own words,
how that solution works,
and put it at the top
of your document--
it says in the
collaboration policy--
"I looked at the solutions,
but I am not copying them."
If you copy them, you
will be penalized, OK?
Just understand how the
proof works, and then
write down how the proof
works in your own words.
See you next time.